Document guidelines for saving or submitting data (#212)
primer/design: content/ui-patterns/saving.mdx

There should only be one save button on a page. Allow only one edit mode activated at a time if you're designing a page with content that can be edited separately (such as an issue title). Pages that contain multiple save buttons can cause confusion about which save button saves which group. Multiple save buttons with the same label can cause confusion for people who use assistive technologies like screen readers and voice recognition software.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img alt="A form with one save button at the bottom" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887934-cfcc5130-53a8-4f40-ba36-97148ead72c0.png" />
    <Caption>Always keep the save button enabled</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img alt="A form with two sections. Each section has it's own save button." src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887938-1fa6b5d7-c5c1-4010-ab99-e5c37bff8c0a.png" />
    <Caption>Disable the save button if the form is invalid or unchanged</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

> <img width="960" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151448415-24fc9f15-627f-47b7-abab-2020d285b770.png" />

Reviewer: This is an image with toggle buttons that don't exist yet; should we remove it?

Author: Oops! Yes, that should have been removed

### Declarative controls

- Text inputs
- Checkbox groups
- Radio button groups
- Browser-native `<select>` dropdown menus
- Multi-select dropdown menus

To maintain consistent interaction patterns across your app, do not use segmented controls in an explicitly saved form. These should only be used with automatic saving.

To ensure your forms are accessible, do not automatically save declarative inputs.

#### Problems with autosaving declarative inputs:
**Text inputs**
- Users are expecting to set a value and then submit
- Sensitive information could be unintentionally submitted. For example: a change password input

**Checkbox groups**
- It could be unclear whether or not their selections have been saved
- Users may accidentally submit a selection that they clicked by accident

**Radio button groups**
- Screenreader users can't read the options without selecting them. This could accidentally apply a selection the user didn't want.

**Browser-native `<select>` dropdowns**
- A select dropdown has a similar problem as a radio button group. Options are selected when a user focuses the select and uses their arrow keys to read through each option

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>

>     <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623711-ad294946-fd67-428d-96b2-e4f534857c8a.png" />

Reviewer: `@vdepizzol` has updated menu mocks here: https://www.figma.com/file/n56A2QJsjdFnkwuBvX9Jdz/save-button-in-select-panel?node-id=0%3A14382

    <Caption>Use save and cancel buttons in dropdowns that take multiple selections</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623713-12028e6d-86ba-4ae6-b46b-d3c88c0fa2c0.png" />
    <Caption>Automatically save selections when the dropdown is closed</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

## Automatic saving

Automatic saving applies changes as they are made.

Automatic saving should be used when the user expects instant feedback from the change they made. Changes should only be saved automatically using [imperative inputs](#imperative-inputs).

<img
    width="960"
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887933-bc96de6a-bc80-43d5-a66a-54a7b202eae3.png"
    alt="Two images of the single-select dropdown for a 'milestone' on a GitHub issue"

> />

Reviewer: I'd suggest a different visual example on this one. Even though it's something that's just one selection, it also contains a filter and tabs, which means it's still technically a dialog and would need the save / cancel 😬. Single-select "menus" can't have these extra things. James mentions it in this issue: https://github.com/github/accessibility/issues/507#issuecomment-1018612516

Can we use something like the Unwatch menu? (doesn't have to be that but a true menu that doesn't have anything extra like a filter or tabs.

Author: Thanks for sharing that comment @ichelsea!

I want to update these guidelines to say that even single-select dropdowns require "save" and "cancel" buttons if they have a filter or tabs, but I don't understand the reason for that. Could you help me understand?

Reviewer: Yep! So, simple single select menus cannot contain any added features like search inputs / filters or tabs. The minute those things are added, they no longer are a semantic menu and need to be placed in a dialog for proper navigation and semantics. A semantic menu can only be a list of items that can be selected.

I would say that it's definitely not _as big_ of an issue as it is with multi-select but it's still an issue.

Author: Thanks for the explanation! I'll add that info.

Author: @ichelsea - I made my first attempt at adding guidance for only auto-saving semantic menus: https://github.com/primer/design/pull/212/files#diff-178947cd6d73ea6bca9fb984bf99e45488dfd46d44df47f319b1a214235dc026R230-R234

Let me know if this sounds correct to you.

PS: I did this at the end of the day, so it's probably a little sloppy and needs rewording.

</Box>

## Calls to action

When data is not automatically saved after the user make changes, buttons are used to submit or cancel the changes.

### Text

All configuration flows should have calls to action that include an obvious active verb such as "Create", "Save", "Delete", or "Update" (for example, "Create" a new repository, "Add" an SSH key to your profile, "Save" security preferences, "Update" a repository's description, "Delete" an old email address).

When defining these calls to actions, make sure to:
1. Keep the text as succinct and clear as possible
2. Add the item’s name to the button text in cases where it may be unclear to the user what is being changed

### Appearance

If the save button is used to save every input on the page, use the _primary_ button appearance.

If the save button has a corresponding cancel button, use the _primary_ button appearance for the save button, and _secondary_ for the cancel button.

If the save button only refers to a segment of inputs on the page, use the _secondary_ button appearance.

For more guidance on button usage, see the [button interface guidelines](/ui-patterns/button-usage).

### State

> Do not disable or hide a form's save button even if the form is invalid or has not been changed. Disabled buttons cannot be focused using the Tab key, and disabled button styles are typically low-contrast and difficult to read.

Author: When they try and submit, the validation errors would appear and explain why the form couldn't be submitted.

> Do not disable or hide a form's save button even if the form is invalid or has not been changed. Disabled buttons cannot be focused using the Tab key, and disabled button styles are typically low-contrast and difficult to read.

Reviewer 2: My only issue with this is that it seems like better UX to flag invalid input at input time rather than after form submission when the person thinks they're done. Better to prevent than correct when possible.

I also don't see any guidelines around when and how to surface invalid input at field-level, either before or after save. Some examples of that would be useful.

> Do not disable or hide a form's save button even if the form is invalid or has not been changed. Disabled buttons cannot be focused using the Tab key, and disabled button styles are typically low-contrast and difficult to read.

Author: @dylanatsmith - validation is a big enough topic that it will have its own interface guidelines. That being said, I can still try and address your feedback for now:

> ...it seems like better UX to flag invalid input at input time rather than after form submission when the person thinks they're done. Better to prevent than correct when possible.

I think there may be some cases where it's good to validate during input (for example: creating a repo name), but I think this pattern usually feels aggressive and distracting.

---

> I also don't see any guidelines around when and how to surface invalid input at field-level

We should surface invalid input at field-level whenever possible. We don't want users to have to guess which fields are invalid and why.

> Do not disable or hide a form's save button even if the form is invalid or has not been changed. Disabled buttons cannot be focused using the Tab key, and disabled button styles are typically low-contrast and difficult to read.

Reviewer 2: Thanks @mperrotti. Sounds like the forthcoming guidelines for validation will clarify those topics.

> I think this pattern usually feels aggressive and distracting.

I get that depending on context, number of fields, requiredness, importance, etc. I don’t feel super strongly about this though.

> Do not disable or hide a form's save button even if the form is invalid or has not been changed. Disabled buttons cannot be focused using the Tab key, and disabled button styles are typically low-contrast and difficult to read.

Reviewer: @dylanatsmith I'm happy to chat more about the accessibility implications of inline validation vs. on submit on slack or a zoom call if you'd like! I think form validation is something we'd like to have in our accessibility docs for future reference of deeper questions like this.

### Placement

Place save buttons somewhere intuitive and easily accessible. If all of the fields save automatically, do not include a save button. This makes it unclear when data is being saved. See the guidelines on [explicit saving](#explicit-saving) and [automatic saving](#automatic-saving) for more information.

> There should only be one save button on a page. Allow only one edit mode activated at a time if you're designing a page with content that can be edited separately (such as an issue title). Pages that contain multiple save buttons can cause confusion about which save button saves which group. Multiple save buttons with the same label can cause confusion for people who use assistive technologies like screen readers and voice recognition software.

Author: Agreed. That feels easier to scan.

> <DoDontContainer>

Author: Oops - you're right.

  <Do>
    <img alt="A form with one save button at the bottom" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887934-cfcc5130-53a8-4f40-ba36-97148ead72c0.png" />
    <Caption>Always keep the save button enabled</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img alt="A form with two sections. Each section has it's own save button." src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887938-1fa6b5d7-c5c1-4010-ab99-e5c37bff8c0a.png" />
    <Caption>Disable the save button if the form is invalid or unchanged</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

#### Bottom-left

> If there is a button to submit and a button to cancel, the cancel button should go to the right of the submit button.

Author: It's slightly different in the next section. It says "the cancel button should go to the **left** of the submit button."

Maybe I should use **bold** in the docs to help people see what's different.

</Box>

#### Bottom-right

If there is a button to submit and a button to cancel, the button to cancel should go to the left of the submit button.

<Box mb={3} display="flex" alignItems="flex-start" flexDirection={["column", "column", "column", "column", "row"]} sx={{gap: 4}}>
    <img
        width="456"
        alt="A small form in a dialog that has 'Cancel' and 'Save' buttons at the bottom right"
        src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623724-d59d5967-5484-4e81-a4c2-1109409956ee.png"
    />
    <Box as="p" mt="0">If the save button is used in a dialog, place the button at the bottom right of the dialog. Right-aligned dialog buttons feel familiar because it's a common pattern across various platforms such as Windows, macOS, and Android.</Box>
</Box>

<Box mb={3} display="flex" alignItems="flex-start" flexDirection={["column", "column", "column", "column", "row"]} sx={{gap: 4}}>
    <img
        width="456"
        alt="A multi-line text input with 'Close with Comment' and 'Comment' buttons right-aligned below the input"
        src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623722-96b6f25d-d8b7-4de7-affe-cd202d6282f1.png"
    />

>     <Box as="p" mt="0">If the button is used to send a message such as a comment on an issue, right-align the button below the text area. This is where GitHub has traditionally placed the **Submit** button for issues and pull requests, and it's common practice in other apps to place a **Send** button to the right. </Box>

Author: That's probably why. There needs to be an extra return between the opening and closing tags.

</Box>

<!--
TODO:
1. Be more specific about when a button should be placed somewhere besides the bottom-right. Define alternative patterns and when to use them.

2. Consider how we might define more patterns to keep the "Save" button easily accessible on long forms:
- add save and cancel buttons on top AND bottom?
- use a sticky header with save and cancel buttons?
-->

#### Adjacent to inline editing input

To simplify the interface, some content may be edited inline without taking the user to a separate flow. An input used for inline editing should have a save button placed very close to visually connect the input with the button.

An input used for inline editing should have a save button placed very close to visually group the input with the button.

<img
    width="960"
    alt="Two images of a pull request header. The first image shows the title as read-only text. The second image shows a text input to edit the pull request title with 'Cancel' and 'Save' buttons below the input."

>     src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623718-9f3f7fe5-ad35-4e4a-b236-da594388203b.png"

Author: Thanks, I'll fix that.

/>

#### Other

If you believe your submit button will not be intuitive or easily accessible using any of the placement options listed here, you may consider alternatives and optionally propose a new Primer pattern.

> <DoDontContainer>

Author: These two examples got mixed up with each other. I fixed them.

Explicitly saved forms can be saved by clicking a submit button or by pressing Enter while focused on an input.

If there is an error saving the data, the user's data should be preserved in the form and they should be given [feedback](#feedback) about the failure.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img alt="A form broken into two sections where one section has a dropdown that automatically saves" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887935-980adacd-41aa-47cb-8756-eeaa1a6d0f2b.png" />
    <Caption>Separate auto-saving controls from an explicitly saved form</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img alt="A form with a single section and it contains a dropdown that automatically saves" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887936-d41900ca-2d63-43ac-bf82-55b4bba0df61.png" />
    <Caption>Mix auto-saving controls with explictly saved controls in the same form</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Unsaved changes

> With the addition of the command palette there are additional opportunities to accidentally navigate away from a page with unpublished edits.

Author: I agree that it's not going to age well. I think we can just remove it.

If a user tries to navigate away from a page with a form that has unsaved changes, you can optionally warn them that their changes will be lost using the [`beforeunload` event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/beforeunload_event). Modern browsers prevent developers from customizing the `alert` message, so we're limited to a generic message like "Do you want to leave this site? Changes you made may not be saved."

> ### Declarative controls

Author: Going with "inputs"

- Text inputs
- Checkbox groups
- Radio button groups
- Browser-native `<select>` dropdown menus
- Multi-select dropdown menus

> To maintain consistent interaction patterns across your app, do not use segmented controls in an explicitly saved form. These should only be used with automatic saving.

Author: I forgot to remove this when I eliminated references to the toggle switch and the segmented control.

- Sensitive information could be unintentionally submitted. For example: a change password input

**Checkbox groups**
- It could be unclear whether or not their selections have been saved
- Users may accidentally submit a selection that they clicked by accident

**Radio button groups**
- Screenreader users can't read the options without selecting them. This could accidentally apply a selection the user didn't want.

**Browser-native `<select>` dropdowns**
- A select dropdown has a similar problem as a radio button group. Options are selected when a user focuses the select and uses their arrow keys to read through each option

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623711-ad294946-fd67-428d-96b2-e4f534857c8a.png" />
    <Caption>Use save and cancel buttons in dropdowns that take multiple selections</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623713-12028e6d-86ba-4ae6-b46b-d3c88c0fa2c0.png" />
    <Caption>Automatically save selections when the dropdown is closed</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

## Automatic saving

Automatic saving applies changes as they are made.

> Automatic saving should be used when the user expects instant feedback from the change they made. Changes should only be saved automatically using [imperative inputs](#imperative-inputs).

Author: Good catch! It will not be added back in this PR, so I'll remove it. The imperative inputs section will be after we have more imperative input components (for example, toggle switch and segmented control).

<Note variant="warning">If your design is being implemented in github.com, avoid using a toast for now. Those toasts have accessibility issues that need to be fixed.</Note>

## Error forgiveness

Before submitting a form with very dangerous consequences (for example, delete a repository), ask the user to confirm they want to submit the form.

For risky changes, provide a way to undo those changes after saving.

<Box display="flex" alignItems="center" flexDirection="column"mx="auto" sx={{gap: 1}}>
    <Box display="inline-block" overflow="hidden" borderWidth="1px" borderColor="border.default" borderStyle="solid" borderRadius="12px">
        <img width="960" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/152434199-a067b037-baf8-4093-8796-b0bb58344223.png" />
    </Box>
    <Text as="p" mt="0" align="center" fontSize={1}>After merging a pull request, a button appears to revert the changes</Text>
</Box>

## Redirecting

When creating new content like issues, discussions, or even larger entities such as repositories or organizations, you may redirect the user to the entity they just created at the end of the flow.

> In some cases, such as forking or using a template, you may need to hold the user at a waiting page while the entity is generated. In these cases, make the user feel confident that something is happening and that their configuration details will not be lost. 

Reviewer 3: Should we define better when is acceptable to use a waiting page?

---
title: Saving
---

import {Box, Text} from '@primer/components'

<Box sx={{fontSize: 3}} class="lead" as="p">
    Save patterns help users store and update their content and configuration throughout GitHub. These changes should be represented in the UI accurately, quickly, and obviously. Their behavior should inspire confidence and trust.
</Box>

## Calls to action

> When data is not automatically saved after the user make changes, buttons are used to submit or cancel the changes.

Reviewer 4: Just a nitpick, but I was a bit confused with this statement, because the guidelines for `Automatic saving` appear down the page and `Calls to action` was the first topic I'm seeing. For a moment I thought I missed something 🙈

Author: Ah, I see what you mean. I was trying to be specific about when you'd actually see call to action buttons

Author: I think this is resolved now that I've moved `Calls to action` under the `Explicit saving` section

### Text

All configuration flows should have calls to action that include an obvious active verb such as "Create", "Save", "Delete", or "Update" (for example, "Create" a new repository, "Add" an SSH key to your profile, "Save" security preferences, "Update" a repository's description, "Delete" an old email address).

When defining these calls to actions, make sure to:
1. Keep the text as succinct and clear as possible
2. Add the item’s name to the button text in cases where it may be unclear to the user what is being changed

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/152432682-2e102919-114a-43ce-a446-5501d287084a.png" />

>     <Caption>Use descriptive text with an active verb</Caption>

Reviewer 5: Are these images swapped?

Reviewer 4: +1, I was confused because the image on the right seems like the right call, but it's a 'dont' 🤔

Author: Yup, these are swapped. Silly mistake on my part 🙈

        />
        <Text as="p" mt="0" align="center" fontSize={1}>Inputs divided into multiple sections</Text>
    </Box>
</Box>

### State

Do not disable or hide a form's save button even if the form is invalid or has not been changed. Disabled buttons cannot be focused using the Tab key, and disabled button styles are typically low-contrast and difficult to read.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623709-2a4257d6-e8d0-4156-b928-c7097981791c.png" />
    <Caption>Always keep the save button enabled</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623715-3b298004-b624-43dc-875c-2590c08070e7.png" />
    <Caption>Don't disable the save button if the form is invalid or unchanged</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Placement

Place save buttons somewhere intuitive and easily accessible. If all of the fields save automatically, do not include a save button. This makes it unclear when data is being saved. See the guidelines on [explicit saving](#explicit-saving) and [automatic saving](#automatic-saving) for more information.

> - There should only be one save button on a page. 

Author: Sorry, that link doesn't seem to be working. Could you try again? I'm guessing you're referring to this line:

> If the save button only refers to a segment of inputs on the page, use the secondary button appearance.

This isn't saying that we should allow multiple sections on a page that may be saved separately. This is referring to a page with one section that needs to be explicitly saved, and the remainder of the form controls on the page are automatically saved.

> - There should only be one save button on a page. 

Author: I will work on rewording this to be more clear

- Allow only one edit mode activated at a time if you're designing a page with content that can be edited separately (such as an issue title). Pages that contain multiple save buttons can cause confusion about which save button saves which group. Multiple save buttons with the same label can cause confusion for people who use assistive technologies like screen readers and voice recognition software.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img alt="A form with one save button at the bottom" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887934-cfcc5130-53a8-4f40-ba36-97148ead72c0.png" />
    <Caption>Have one save button per form</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>
    <img alt="A form with two sections. Each section has it's own save button." src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887938-1fa6b5d7-c5c1-4010-ab99-e5c37bff8c0a.png" />
    <Caption>Don't have one save button per section of a form</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

#### Bottom-left

> If there is a button to submit and a button to cancel, the cancel button should go to the **right** of the submit button.

Reviewer 4: This statement confused me, because I don't see a cancel button on the example. 🤔

Author: Great point. I'll update the example.

<Box mb={3} display="flex" alignItems="flex-start" flexDirection={["column", "column", "column", "column", "row"]} sx={{gap: 3}}>
    <img
        width="456"
        alt="A form with the inputs and save button left aligned"
        src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623721-2cbe406b-ee3d-4bef-85f2-7f671771308a.png"

>     />

Reviewer 4: I didn't initially understand this image. When I read the text, though, it was clear what the eye and the arrows were representing. Hot Take™, but do we need to visually represent what the reading hierarchy looks like, or is it enough to mention it on the explainer paragraph? In this specific scenario, it was initially more confusing to me rather than helpful

Author: I'd like to keep the image, but maybe we don't need the to visually represent the reading hierarchy.

I'm removing the little eye and the arrows unless any other reviewers disagree.

Reviewer 4: +1 to keeping the image! The eye and arrow elements were the only thing that took me a while to understand

<!--
TODO:
1. Be more specific about when a button should be placed somewhere besides the bottom-right. Define alternative patterns and when to use them.

2. Consider how we might define more patterns to keep the "Save" button easily accessible on long forms:
- add save and cancel buttons on top AND bottom?
- use a sticky header with save and cancel buttons?
-->

#### Adjacent to inline editing input

To simplify the interface, some content may be edited inline without taking the user to a separate flow.

An input used for inline editing should have a save button placed very close to visually connect the input with the button.

<img
    width="960"
    alt="Two images of a pull request header. The first image shows the title as read-only text. The second image shows a text input to edit the pull request title with 'Cancel' and 'Save' buttons below the input."
    src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151623718-9f3f7fe5-ad35-4e4a-b236-da594388203b.png"
/>

#### Other

If you believe your submit button will not be intuitive or easily accessible using any of the placement options listed here, you may consider alternatives and optionally propose a new Primer pattern.

> ## Explicit saving

Reviewer 4: Just checking — are `calls to action` a form of `explicit saving`? Based on what I'm reading, I'd assume so, but they have the same hierarchy 🤔. Calls to action are also higher up in the page, which suggests they are unrelated concepts.

Author: Great point! I'll bring "Calls to action" into the "Explicit saving" section.

When designing a form, start with an explicit saving pattern. Avoid mixing explicit and automatic save patterns on a single page with multiple forms, and never mix save patterns in a single form. For example: if I upload a profile photo in the "Public profile" form, that change should not be saved until I explicitly submit the whole form.

Explicitly saved forms can be saved by clicking a submit button or by pressing Enter while focused on an input.

If there is an error saving the data, the user's data should be preserved in the form and they should be given [feedback](#feedback) about the failure.

<DoDontContainer>
  <Do>
    <img alt="A form broken into two sections where one section has a dropdown that automatically saves" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887935-980adacd-41aa-47cb-8756-eeaa1a6d0f2b.png" />
    <Caption>Separate auto-saving inputs from an explicitly saved form</Caption>
  </Do>
  <Dont>

>     <img alt="A form with a single section and it contains a dropdown that automatically saves" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887936-d41900ca-2d63-43ac-bf82-55b4bba0df61.png" />

Author: I see the confusion about the language dropdown. There is no immediate result from making your selection like there is with the [watch repository dropdown](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/152013139-02eb5213-bb19-4c8d-8b19-01f1d73602d1.gif).

Yes, the save button applies to the form items in the section above.

>     <img alt="A form with a single section and it contains a dropdown that automatically saves" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/151887936-d41900ca-2d63-43ac-bf82-55b4bba0df61.png" />

Author: Thanks for flagging this.

I need to give some more thought to how we can have form controls that save automatically on the same page as a form that needs to be explicitly saved.

    <Caption>Don't mix auto-saving inputs and explicitly saved inputs in the same form</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

### Unsaved changes

If a user tries to navigate away from a page with a form that has unsaved changes, you have the option to warn them that their changes will be lost using the [`beforeunload` event](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/API/Window/beforeunload_event). Modern browsers prevent developers from customizing the `alert` message, so we're limited to a generic message like "Do you want to leave this site? Changes you made may not be saved."

> ### Declarative controls

Reviewer 5: Should this say **Declarative inputs** instead?

Author: We switched to calling them "controls"

To ensure your forms are accessible, you should use explicit saving (and not automatic saving) in declarative inputs. These are:

- Text inputs
- Checkbox groups
- Radio button groups
- Browser-native `<select>` dropdown menus
- Multi-select dropdown menus

> To ensure your forms are accessible, do not automatically save declarative inputs.

Author: Removed it 🔪

There are a few issues to bear in mind with autosaving declarative inputs.

- Text inputs: Users expect to set a value and then submit. Sensitive information could be unintentionally submitted, such as a change password input.
- Checkbox groups: It could be unclear whether or not the selections has been saved. Users may accidentally submit a selection clicked by accident.
- Radio button groups: Screenreader users can't read the options without selecting them, which could accidentally apply a selection the user didn't want.

> - Browser-native `<select>` dropdowns: Similarly to radio button groups, options could be selected when a user focuses the select and uses the arrow keys to read through each option.

Reviewer 4: I would expect this guidance to be on the `Automatic saving` section, to explain scenarios where that choice might not be advisable.

    <Caption>Don't automatically save selections once the dropdown is closed</Caption>
  </Dont>
</DoDontContainer>

## Automatic saving

Automatic saving applies changes as they are made. Automatic saving should be used when the user expects instant feedback from the change they made.

<Box mb={3} display="flex" alignItems="center" flexDirection="column" mt={6} mx="auto" sx={{gap: 2, maxWidth: '450px'}}>
    <Box display="inline-block" overflow="hidden" borderWidth="1px" borderColor="border.default" borderStyle="solid" borderRadius="12px">
        <img
            width="456"
            src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/152013139-02eb5213-bb19-4c8d-8b19-01f1d73602d1.gif"
            alt="Opening the 'Watch' dropdown menu and changing. It saves automatically."
        />
    </Box>
    <Text as="p" mt="0" align="center" fontSize={1}>If a form field is saved automatically, it should be obvious whether or not it saved without using text or visual indicators. A visual indicator for whether or not a form field has been saved successfully could be mistaken as a validation status.</Text>
</Box>

> ### Dropdown menu accessibility
> 
> Automatically saving a single-select dropdown menu is accessible as long as it is a semantic menu. A semantic menu can only be a list of items that can be selected.
> 
> As soon as a dropdown has additional features (search inputs, filters, tabs, etc), the dropdown should be treated like a dialog with a button to submit and a button to cancel. A dialog will provide the proper navigation features for folks using assistive technology.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Dropdown menu accessibility

Semantic menus should only have a list of options to select from and should not have a save button in their dropdown. As soon as additional features (search inputs, filters, tabs, etc) are added, the component should be treated like a dialog with a button to submit and a button to cancel. 
```

Trimmed it a bit; let me know what you think @mperrotti. I took out the last section about screen readers because it provides a better experience to more than just assistive technology users 🙂

## Feedback

If the change is not obvious within the user's viewport, provide feedback to let the user know that the change occurred successfully.

- If the change occurred without a redirect or page refresh, you can use the toast component.

> - If the change occurred and the page refreshes or redirects, you can use a flash banner component.

Reviewer 4: I'd love to see these suggestions inline! (Or, alternatively, linking it out to the pattern page)

<Note variant="warning">If your design is being implemented in github.com, avoid using a toast for now. Those toasts have accessibility issues that need to be fixed.</Note>

> ## Error forgiveness

Reviewer 4: I'm not sure if this is within 'saving and submitting data' scope, but I'd love to see guidance on what to pick on a deleting scenario:
https://github.slack.com/archives/CLU79NDAS/p1645466052071439

Author: Agreed - we should have guidance about this. I'm going to bring this up in the next Primer patterns working session  (Tuesday March 1) to decide if that info belongs in the "saving and submitting data" scope, or somewhere else.

> Before submitting a form with very dangerous consequences (for example, delete a repository), ask the to user confirm they want to submit the form.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Before submitting a form with very dangerous consequences (for example, delete a repository), ask the user to confirm they want to submit the form.
```

For risky changes, provide a way to undo those changes after saving.

<Box display="flex" alignItems="center" flexDirection="column"mx="auto" sx={{gap: 1}}>
    <Box display="inline-block" overflow="hidden" borderWidth="1px" borderColor="border.default" borderStyle="solid" borderRadius="12px">
        <img width="960" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/2313998/152434199-a067b037-baf8-4093-8796-b0bb58344223.png" />
    </Box>
    <Text as="p" mt="0" align="center" fontSize={1}>After merging a pull request, a button appears to revert the changes</Text>
</Box>

> ## Redirecting

Reviewer 4: Do we have these patterns on a different page? Knowing I can do this is helpful, but I'm not sure what patterns I should use and have available

Author: We don't have specific patterns defined for this yet
